documentation/getting-started/overview.md, before:

# Architecture Overview

The OPNet Transaction Library provides a layered system for building, signing, and broadcasting Bitcoin transactions with quantum-resistant cryptography support. It serves as the client-side SDK for the OPNet protocol -- a smart contract layer on Bitcoin.

## Table of Contents
- [Library Purpose](#library-purpose)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Key Concepts](#key-concepts)
  - [Two-Transaction Model](#two-transaction-model)
  - [UTXO-Based Model](#utxo-based-model)
  - [Quantum-Resistant Addresses](#quantum-resistant-addresses)
  - [Dual Environment Support](#dual-environment-support)
  - [Offline Transaction Signing](#offline-transaction-signing)
- [Transaction Types](#transaction-types)
- [Network Support](#network-support)
- [Address Systems](#address-systems)
- [Class Hierarchy](#class-hierarchy)

## Library Purpose

The library enables developers to:

- **Build Bitcoin transactions** -- Create funding, deployment, interaction, multi-signature, and custom script transactions
- **Sign with quantum resistance** -- Every transaction includes ML-DSA (FIPS 204) post-quantum signatures alongside classical Schnorr signatures
- **Deploy and interact with smart contracts** -- Encode calldata, deploy WASM bytecode, and call contract functions on the OPNet network
- **Work in any environment** -- Identical API for Node.js backends and browser frontends, with built-in support for wallet extensions (Unisat, Xverse, OP_WALLET)

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph EntryPoints["Entry Points"]
        TF["TransactionFactory<br/><i>Main API surface</i>"]
        OP["OPNetLimitedProvider<br/><i>UTXO fetching</i>"]
    end

    subgraph Builders["Transaction Builders"]
        TT["TweakedTransaction<br/><i>PSBT construction,<br/>Taproot tweaking, signing</i>"]
        TB["TransactionBuilder&lt;T&gt;<br/><i>Abstract base: UTXO management,<br/>fee calculation, outputs</i>"]
        TT --> TB
        TB --> FT["FundingTransaction<br/>BTC transfers"]
        TB --> DT["DeploymentTransaction<br/>Contract deployment"]
        TB --> IT["InteractionTransaction<br/>Contract calls"]
        TB --> MT["MultiSignTransaction<br/>Multi-sig operations"]
        TB --> CT["CustomScriptTransaction<br/>Custom scripts"]
        TB --> XT["CancelTransaction<br/>TX cancellation"]
        TB --> CI["ConsolidatedInteractionTransaction<br/>CHCT anti-censorship"]
    end

    subgraph Generators["Script Generators"]
        CG["CalldataGenerator"]
        DG["DeploymentGenerator"]
        MG["MultiSignGenerator"]
        HG["HashCommitmentGenerator"]
    end

    subgraph KeyManagement["Key Management"]
        MN["Mnemonic<br/><i>BIP39 + BIP360</i>"]
        WL["Wallet<br/><i>Classical + Quantum keys</i>"]
        EC["EcKeyPair<br/><i>Secp256k1 operations</i>"]
        MS["MessageSigner<br/><i>Schnorr + ML-DSA signing</i>"]
    end

    TF --> TT
    TT --> Generators
    MN --> WL
    WL --> TT
```

## Key Concepts

### Two-Transaction Model

OPNet smart contract operations (deployments and interactions) require **two Bitcoin transactions** that are broadcast together:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant FundingTx as Funding TX
    participant InteractionTx as Interaction TX
    participant Network as Bitcoin Network

    User->>FundingTx: 1. Create funding transaction
    Note over FundingTx: Sends exact amount to<br/>a one-time Taproot address

    User->>InteractionTx: 2. Create interaction transaction
    Note over InteractionTx: Spends funding output,<br/>embeds calldata in Tapscript

    User->>Network: 3. Broadcast both transactions
    Note over Network: Funding TX confirms first,<br/>Interaction TX spends its output
```

**Why two transactions?** The interaction transaction embeds contract calldata in a Taproot script path. The funding transaction creates a UTXO with the exact amount needed (fees + priority fee + gas), locked to the script address. The `TransactionFactory` handles this automatically -- you provide parameters and receive both signed transactions ready to broadcast.

Simple BTC transfers (funding-only) use a single transaction.

### UTXO-Based Model

Bitcoin uses Unspent Transaction Outputs (UTXOs), not account balances. Every transaction consumes existing UTXOs as inputs and creates new UTXOs as outputs.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Inputs["Inputs (consumed)"]
        U1["UTXO: 50,000 sat"]
        U2["UTXO: 30,000 sat"]
    end

    subgraph TX["Your Transaction"]
        direction TB
        Fee["Fee: 1,500 sat"]
    end

    subgraph Outputs["Outputs (created)"]
        O1["Recipient: 40,000 sat"]
        O2["Change: 38,500 sat"]
    end

    U1 --> TX
    U2 --> TX
    TX --> O1
    TX --> O2
```

The library manages UTXO selection, change calculation, and fee estimation. Each method on `TransactionFactory` returns the new UTXOs (`nextUTXOs`) that your application should track for subsequent transactions.

### Quantum-Resistant Addresses

OPNet implements **BIP360** for quantum-resistant key management using ML-DSA (FIPS 204, formerly CRYSTALS-Dilithium). Every wallet holds two key pairs:

| Key Type | Algorithm | Purpose |
|----------|-----------|---------|
| Classical | secp256k1 (Schnorr) | Bitcoin transaction signing, P2TR addresses |
| Quantum | ML-DSA-44/65/87 | OPNet identity, quantum-resistant signatures |

The quantum public key is hashed (SHA-256) to produce a 32-byte **OPNet address** that serves as the user's identity across the protocol. Classical keys handle the Bitcoin layer; quantum keys handle the OPNet protocol layer.

### Dual Environment Support

The library works identically in Node.js and browsers:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph API["Unified API"]
        TF2["TransactionFactory"]
        MS2["MessageSigner"]
    end

    subgraph NodeJS["Node.js"]
        NC["Native crypto"]
        NB["Native Buffer"]
    end

    subgraph Browser["Browser"]
        WC["WebCrypto + polyfills"]
        BB["Buffer polyfill"]
        WE["Wallet Extensions<br/>(Unisat, Xverse, OP_WALLET)"]
    end

    API --> NodeJS
    API --> Browser
```

In the browser, `MessageSigner` auto-detects OP_WALLET extensions. Methods like `signMessageAuto()` and `signMLDSAMessageAuto()` automatically delegate to the browser wallet if available, or fall back to a provided key pair.

### Offline Transaction Signing

Transactions can be built in an online environment (with UTXO data but no private keys), exported as a serialized state, transported to an air-gapped machine for signing, and then returned for broadcast. This is handled by `OfflineTransactionManager`:

1. **Online:** Build transaction, export state (base64)
2. **Offline:** Import state, attach signer, sign, export signed TX hex
3. **Online:** Broadcast the signed transaction

## Transaction Types

The `TransactionType` enum defines all supported operations:

| Type | Value | Description | TX Count |
|------|-------|-------------|----------|
| `GENERIC` | 0 | Generic transaction (base type) | -- |
| `FUNDING` | 1 | Simple BTC transfer between addresses | 1 |
| `DEPLOYMENT` | 2 | Deploy a smart contract (WASM bytecode) | 2 |
| `INTERACTION` | 3 | Call a function on a deployed contract | 2 |
| `MULTI_SIG` | 4 | Multi-signature transaction (M-of-N) | 2 |
| `CUSTOM_CODE` | 5 | Execute a custom Bitcoin script | 2 |
| `CANCEL` | 6 | Cancel/recover a stuck transaction | 1 |
| `CONSOLIDATED_SETUP` | 7 | CHCT setup phase (anti-censorship) | 1 (pair) |
| `CONSOLIDATED_REVEAL` | 8 | CHCT reveal phase (anti-censorship) | 1 (pair) |

```typescript
import { TransactionType } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

// TransactionType.INTERACTION === 3
```

## Network Support

The library supports multiple Bitcoin networks, configured via the `networks` object from `@btc-vision/bitcoin` and the `ChainId` enum:

### Bitcoin Networks

| Network | Bech32 Prefix | Usage |
|---------|--------------|-------|
| `networks.bitcoin` | `bc1` | Bitcoin mainnet |
| `networks.testnet` | `tb1` | Bitcoin testnet |
| `networks.regtest` | `bcrt1` | Local development / regression testing |

### Chain IDs

```typescript
import { ChainId } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

enum ChainId {
    Bitcoin = 0,   // Bitcoin mainnet, testnet, regtest
    Fractal = 1,   // Fractal Bitcoin
}
```

The `chainId` parameter is optional on transaction parameters. When omitted, it defaults to `ChainId.Bitcoin`.

### Selecting a Network

```typescript
import { networks } from '@btc-vision/bitcoin';

// Mainnet
const mainnetWallet = mnemonic.derive(0);
// mainnetWallet.p2tr => "bc1p..."

// Testnet
const testnetMnemonic = new Mnemonic(phrase, '', networks.testnet);
const testnetWallet = testnetMnemonic.derive(0);
// testnetWallet.p2tr => "tb1p..."

// Regtest
const regtestMnemonic = new Mnemonic(phrase, '', networks.regtest);
const regtestWallet = regtestMnemonic.derive(0);
// regtestWallet.p2tr => "bcrt1p..."
```

## Address Systems

OPNet uses two complementary address systems:

### Bitcoin Addresses (On-Chain)

Standard Bitcoin addresses used for transaction inputs and outputs. The library generates Taproot (P2TR) addresses by default:

| Format | Prefix | Example |
|--------|--------|---------|
| P2TR (Taproot) | `bc1p` | `bc1p5d7rjq7g6rdk2yhzks9smlaqtedr4dekq08ge8ztwac72sfr9rusxg3297` |
| P2WPKH (SegWit) | `bc1q` | `bc1qw508d6qejxtdg4y5r3zarvary0c5xw7kv8f3t4` |
| P2PKH (Legacy) | `1` | `1A1zP1eP5QGefi2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa` |

Access all address formats from a `Wallet` instance:

```typescript
const wallet = mnemonic.derive(0);

wallet.p2tr;          // Taproot address (primary for OPNet)
wallet.p2wpkh;        // Native SegWit address
wallet.legacy;        // Legacy P2PKH address
wallet.segwitLegacy;  // Wrapped SegWit P2SH address
wallet.p2wda;         // P2WDA address (returns IP2WSHAddress object with .address and .witnessScript)
```

### OPNet Addresses (Protocol Identity)

The OPNet address is the **SHA-256 hash of the ML-DSA public key**, represented as 32 bytes. This serves as the user's universal identifier within the OPNet smart contract layer.

```typescript
import { Address } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

const wallet = mnemonic.derive(0);

// The Address object IS the 32-byte hash (extends Uint8Array)
const opnetAddress: Address = wallet.address;

// Hex representation (64 characters)
console.log(opnetAddress.toHex());
// => "a1b2c3d4e5f6...64 hex chars..."

// The underlying quantum public key (1312 bytes for ML-DSA-44)
console.log(wallet.quantumPublicKey.length);
// => 1312
```

### Address Relationship

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    MLDSA["ML-DSA Public Key<br/>(1312 bytes)"] -->|SHA-256| OPNet["OPNet Address<br/>(32 bytes)"]
    Secp["secp256k1 Public Key<br/>(33 bytes)"] -->|Taproot tweak| P2TR["Bitcoin P2TR<br/>(bc1p...)"]

    subgraph Wallet["Wallet Instance"]
        MLDSA
        Secp
    end

    subgraph Addresses["Derived Addresses"]
        OPNet
        P2TR
    end
```

Both addresses derive from the same `Wallet`, which is derived from a single BIP39 mnemonic via parallel derivation paths:
- **Classical path:** `m/84'/0'/0'/0/0` (BIP84 for secp256k1)
- **Quantum path:** `m/360'/0'/0'/0/0` (BIP360 for ML-DSA)

## Class Hierarchy

### Transaction Building

```
TransactionFactory                     -- Top-level API (signInteraction, signDeployment, createBTCTransfer)
  TweakedTransaction                   -- PSBT construction, Taproot tweaking, signature orchestration
    TransactionBuilder<T>              -- Abstract base (UTXO management, fee estimation, outputs)
      FundingTransaction               -- Simple BTC transfers
      DeploymentTransaction            -- Contract deployment (bytecode + calldata)
      InteractionTransaction           -- Contract function calls (calldata)
      MultiSignTransaction             -- M-of-N multi-signature operations
      CustomScriptTransaction          -- Custom Bitcoin script execution
      CancelTransaction                -- Transaction cancellation / recovery
      ConsolidatedInteractionTransaction -- CHCT anti-censorship system
```

### Key Management

```
Mnemonic                    -- BIP39 phrase + BIP360 quantum root
  Wallet                    -- Combined classical + quantum key pair
    Address                 -- 32-byte OPNet address (SHA-256 of ML-DSA pubkey)
    EcKeyPair               -- secp256k1 key operations
    QuantumBIP32Interface   -- ML-DSA key derivation and signing
```

### Signing

```
MessageSigner               -- Singleton for Schnorr + ML-DSA message signing
  TweakedSigner             -- Taproot key tweaking for transaction signing
  BrowserSignerBase         -- Base class for browser wallet integration
    UnisatSigner            -- Unisat wallet extension adapter
    XverseSigner            -- Xverse wallet extension adapter
```

---

**Previous:** [Installation & Setup](./installation.md) | **Next:** [Quick Start Guide](./quick-start.md)

Commit message:

Add P2MR (BIP360) support and docs
Introduce Pay-to-Merkle-Root (P2MR, BIP 360) support across the codebase and documentation. Adds useP2MR flag in transaction interfaces and builders, implements P2MR handling in TweakedTransaction/TransactionBuilder/MultiSign/Deployment/Custom/Cancel/SharedInteraction flows, and exposes a P2MR multisig helper (P2MR_MS). Implements P2MR CSV timelock generation (TimeLockGenerator + Address.toCSVP2MR), updates exports (opnet) and API docs, and updates user docs/examples to describe P2MR usage and quantum-safety rationale. Also bumps package version to 1.8.0-beta.1 and adds a p2mr test scaffold.

documentation/getting-started/overview.md, after:

# Architecture Overview

The OPNet Transaction Library provides a layered system for building, signing, and broadcasting Bitcoin transactions with quantum-resistant cryptography support. It serves as the client-side SDK for the OPNet protocol -- a smart contract layer on Bitcoin.

## Table of Contents
- [Library Purpose](#library-purpose)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Key Concepts](#key-concepts)
  - [Two-Transaction Model](#two-transaction-model)
  - [UTXO-Based Model](#utxo-based-model)
  - [Quantum-Resistant Addresses](#quantum-resistant-addresses)
  - [Dual Environment Support](#dual-environment-support)
  - [Offline Transaction Signing](#offline-transaction-signing)
- [Transaction Types](#transaction-types)
- [Network Support](#network-support)
- [Address Systems](#address-systems)
- [Class Hierarchy](#class-hierarchy)

## Library Purpose

The library enables developers to:

- **Build Bitcoin transactions** -- Create funding, deployment, interaction, multi-signature, and custom script transactions
- **Sign with quantum resistance** -- Every transaction includes ML-DSA (FIPS 204) post-quantum signatures alongside classical Schnorr signatures
- **Deploy and interact with smart contracts** -- Encode calldata, deploy WASM bytecode, and call contract functions on the OPNet network
- **Work in any environment** -- Identical API for Node.js backends and browser frontends, with built-in support for wallet extensions (Unisat, Xverse, OP_WALLET)

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph EntryPoints["Entry Points"]
        TF["TransactionFactory<br/><i>Main API surface</i>"]
        OP["OPNetLimitedProvider<br/><i>UTXO fetching</i>"]
    end

    subgraph Builders["Transaction Builders"]
        TT["TweakedTransaction<br/><i>PSBT construction,<br/>Taproot tweaking, signing</i>"]
        TB["TransactionBuilder&lt;T&gt;<br/><i>Abstract base: UTXO management,<br/>fee calculation, outputs</i>"]
        TT --> TB
        TB --> FT["FundingTransaction<br/>BTC transfers"]
        TB --> DT["DeploymentTransaction<br/>Contract deployment"]
        TB --> IT["InteractionTransaction<br/>Contract calls"]
        TB --> MT["MultiSignTransaction<br/>Multi-sig operations"]
        TB --> CT["CustomScriptTransaction<br/>Custom scripts"]
        TB --> XT["CancelTransaction<br/>TX cancellation"]
        TB --> CI["ConsolidatedInteractionTransaction<br/>CHCT anti-censorship"]
    end

    subgraph Generators["Script Generators"]
        CG["CalldataGenerator"]
        DG["DeploymentGenerator"]
        MG["MultiSignGenerator"]
        HG["HashCommitmentGenerator"]
    end

    subgraph KeyManagement["Key Management"]
        MN["Mnemonic<br/><i>BIP39 + BIP360</i>"]
        WL["Wallet<br/><i>Classical + Quantum keys</i>"]
        EC["EcKeyPair<br/><i>Secp256k1 operations</i>"]
        MS["MessageSigner<br/><i>Schnorr + ML-DSA signing</i>"]
    end

    TF --> TT
    TT --> Generators
    MN --> WL
    WL --> TT
```

## Key Concepts

### Two-Transaction Model

OPNet smart contract operations (deployments and interactions) require **two Bitcoin transactions** that are broadcast together:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant FundingTx as Funding TX
    participant InteractionTx as Interaction TX
    participant Network as Bitcoin Network

    User->>FundingTx: 1. Create funding transaction
    Note over FundingTx: Sends exact amount to<br/>a one-time Taproot address

    User->>InteractionTx: 2. Create interaction transaction
    Note over InteractionTx: Spends funding output,<br/>embeds calldata in Tapscript

    User->>Network: 3. Broadcast both transactions
    Note over Network: Funding TX confirms first,<br/>Interaction TX spends its output
```

**Why two transactions?** The interaction transaction embeds contract calldata in a Taproot script path. The funding transaction creates a UTXO with the exact amount needed (fees + priority fee + gas), locked to the script address. The `TransactionFactory` handles this automatically -- you provide parameters and receive both signed transactions ready to broadcast.

Simple BTC transfers (funding-only) use a single transaction.

### UTXO-Based Model

Bitcoin uses Unspent Transaction Outputs (UTXOs), not account balances. Every transaction consumes existing UTXOs as inputs and creates new UTXOs as outputs.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Inputs["Inputs (consumed)"]
        U1["UTXO: 50,000 sat"]
        U2["UTXO: 30,000 sat"]
    end

    subgraph TX["Your Transaction"]
        direction TB
        Fee["Fee: 1,500 sat"]
    end

    subgraph Outputs["Outputs (created)"]
        O1["Recipient: 40,000 sat"]
        O2["Change: 38,500 sat"]
    end

    U1 --> TX
    U2 --> TX
    TX --> O1
    TX --> O2
```

The library manages UTXO selection, change calculation, and fee estimation. Each method on `TransactionFactory` returns the new UTXOs (`nextUTXOs`) that your application should track for subsequent transactions.

### Quantum-Resistant Addresses

OPNet implements **BIP360** for quantum-resistant key management using ML-DSA (FIPS 204, formerly CRYSTALS-Dilithium). Every wallet holds two key pairs:

| Key Type | Algorithm | Purpose |
|----------|-----------|---------|
| Classical | secp256k1 (Schnorr) | Bitcoin transaction signing, P2TR/P2MR addresses |
| Quantum | ML-DSA-44/65/87 | OPNet identity, quantum-resistant signatures |

The quantum public key is hashed (SHA-256) to produce a 32-byte **OPNet address** that serves as the user's identity across the protocol. Classical keys handle the Bitcoin layer; quantum keys handle the OPNet protocol layer.

For quantum-safe transaction outputs, the library supports **P2MR (Pay-to-Merkle-Root, BIP 360)** -- a SegWit version 2 output type that commits directly to a Merkle root without exposing an internal public key. All transaction builders accept a `useP2MR` flag to enable P2MR outputs (`bc1z...` addresses) instead of the default P2TR (`bc1p...`).

### Dual Environment Support

The library works identically in Node.js and browsers:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph API["Unified API"]
        TF2["TransactionFactory"]
        MS2["MessageSigner"]
    end

    subgraph NodeJS["Node.js"]
        NC["Native crypto"]
        NB["Native Buffer"]
    end

    subgraph Browser["Browser"]
        WC["WebCrypto + polyfills"]
        BB["Buffer polyfill"]
        WE["Wallet Extensions<br/>(Unisat, Xverse, OP_WALLET)"]
    end

    API --> NodeJS
    API --> Browser
```

In the browser, `MessageSigner` auto-detects OP_WALLET extensions. Methods like `signMessageAuto()` and `signMLDSAMessageAuto()` automatically delegate to the browser wallet if available, or fall back to a provided key pair.

### Offline Transaction Signing

Transactions can be built in an online environment (with UTXO data but no private keys), exported as a serialized state, transported to an air-gapped machine for signing, and then returned for broadcast. This is handled by `OfflineTransactionManager`:

1. **Online:** Build transaction, export state (base64)
2. **Offline:** Import state, attach signer, sign, export signed TX hex
3. **Online:** Broadcast the signed transaction

## Transaction Types

The `TransactionType` enum defines all supported operations:

| Type | Value | Description | TX Count |
|------|-------|-------------|----------|
| `GENERIC` | 0 | Generic transaction (base type) | -- |
| `FUNDING` | 1 | Simple BTC transfer between addresses | 1 |
| `DEPLOYMENT` | 2 | Deploy a smart contract (WASM bytecode) | 2 |
| `INTERACTION` | 3 | Call a function on a deployed contract | 2 |
| `MULTI_SIG` | 4 | Multi-signature transaction (M-of-N) | 2 |
| `CUSTOM_CODE` | 5 | Execute a custom Bitcoin script | 2 |
| `CANCEL` | 6 | Cancel/recover a stuck transaction | 1 |
| `CONSOLIDATED_SETUP` | 7 | CHCT setup phase (anti-censorship) | 1 (pair) |
| `CONSOLIDATED_REVEAL` | 8 | CHCT reveal phase (anti-censorship) | 1 (pair) |

```typescript
import { TransactionType } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

// TransactionType.INTERACTION === 3
```

## Network Support

The library supports multiple Bitcoin networks, configured via the `networks` object from `@btc-vision/bitcoin` and the `ChainId` enum:

### Bitcoin Networks

| Network | Bech32 Prefix | Usage |
|---------|--------------|-------|
| `networks.bitcoin` | `bc1` | Bitcoin mainnet |
| `networks.testnet` | `tb1` | Bitcoin testnet |
| `networks.regtest` | `bcrt1` | Local development / regression testing |

### Chain IDs

```typescript
import { ChainId } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

enum ChainId {
    Bitcoin = 0,   // Bitcoin mainnet, testnet, regtest
    Fractal = 1,   // Fractal Bitcoin
}
```

The `chainId` parameter is optional on transaction parameters. When omitted, it defaults to `ChainId.Bitcoin`.

### Selecting a Network

```typescript
import { networks } from '@btc-vision/bitcoin';

// Mainnet
const mainnetWallet = mnemonic.derive(0);
// mainnetWallet.p2tr => "bc1p..."

// Testnet
const testnetMnemonic = new Mnemonic(phrase, '', networks.testnet);
const testnetWallet = testnetMnemonic.derive(0);
// testnetWallet.p2tr => "tb1p..."

// Regtest
const regtestMnemonic = new Mnemonic(phrase, '', networks.regtest);
const regtestWallet = regtestMnemonic.derive(0);
// regtestWallet.p2tr => "bcrt1p..."
```

## Address Systems

OPNet uses two complementary address systems:

### Bitcoin Addresses (On-Chain)

Standard Bitcoin addresses used for transaction inputs and outputs. The library generates Taproot (P2TR) addresses by default, with optional P2MR (BIP 360) support:

| Format | Prefix | Example |
|--------|--------|---------|
| P2TR (Taproot) | `bc1p` | `bc1p5d7rjq7g6rdk2yhzks9smlaqtedr4dekq08ge8ztwac72sfr9rusxg3297` |
| P2MR (Merkle Root) | `bc1z` | `bc1z...` (quantum-safe, no key-path spend) |
| P2WPKH (SegWit) | `bc1q` | `bc1qw508d6qejxtdg4y5r3zarvary0c5xw7kv8f3t4` |
| P2PKH (Legacy) | `1` | `1A1zP1eP5QGefi2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa` |

Access all address formats from a `Wallet` instance:

```typescript
const wallet = mnemonic.derive(0);

wallet.p2tr;          // Taproot address (primary for OPNet)
wallet.p2wpkh;        // Native SegWit address
wallet.legacy;        // Legacy P2PKH address
wallet.segwitLegacy;  // Wrapped SegWit P2SH address
wallet.p2wda;         // P2WDA address (returns IP2WSHAddress object with .address and .witnessScript)
```

### OPNet Addresses (Protocol Identity)

The OPNet address is the **SHA-256 hash of the ML-DSA public key**, represented as 32 bytes. This serves as the user's universal identifier within the OPNet smart contract layer.

```typescript
import { Address } from '@btc-vision/transaction';

const wallet = mnemonic.derive(0);

// The Address object IS the 32-byte hash (extends Uint8Array)
const opnetAddress: Address = wallet.address;

// Hex representation (64 characters)
console.log(opnetAddress.toHex());
// => "a1b2c3d4e5f6...64 hex chars..."

// The underlying quantum public key (1312 bytes for ML-DSA-44)
console.log(wallet.quantumPublicKey.length);
// => 1312
```

### Address Relationship

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    MLDSA["ML-DSA Public Key<br/>(1312 bytes)"] -->|SHA-256| OPNet["OPNet Address<br/>(32 bytes)"]
    Secp["secp256k1 Public Key<br/>(33 bytes)"] -->|Taproot tweak| P2TR["Bitcoin P2TR<br/>(bc1p...)"]

    subgraph Wallet["Wallet Instance"]
        MLDSA
        Secp
    end

    subgraph Addresses["Derived Addresses"]
        OPNet
        P2TR
    end
```

Both addresses derive from the same `Wallet`, which is derived from a single BIP39 mnemonic via parallel derivation paths:
- **Classical path:** `m/84'/0'/0'/0/0` (BIP84 for secp256k1)
- **Quantum path:** `m/360'/0'/0'/0/0` (BIP360 for ML-DSA)

## Class Hierarchy

### Transaction Building

```
TransactionFactory                     -- Top-level API (signInteraction, signDeployment, createBTCTransfer)
  TweakedTransaction                   -- PSBT construction, Taproot tweaking, signature orchestration
    TransactionBuilder<T>              -- Abstract base (UTXO management, fee estimation, outputs)
      FundingTransaction               -- Simple BTC transfers
      DeploymentTransaction            -- Contract deployment (bytecode + calldata)
      InteractionTransaction           -- Contract function calls (calldata)
      MultiSignTransaction             -- M-of-N multi-signature operations
      CustomScriptTransaction          -- Custom Bitcoin script execution
      CancelTransaction                -- Transaction cancellation / recovery
      ConsolidatedInteractionTransaction -- CHCT anti-censorship system
```

### Key Management

```
Mnemonic                    -- BIP39 phrase + BIP360 quantum root
  Wallet                    -- Combined classical + quantum key pair
    Address                 -- 32-byte OPNet address (SHA-256 of ML-DSA pubkey)
    EcKeyPair               -- secp256k1 key operations
    QuantumBIP32Interface   -- ML-DSA key derivation and signing
```

### Signing

```
MessageSigner               -- Singleton for Schnorr + ML-DSA message signing
  TweakedSigner             -- Taproot key tweaking for transaction signing
  BrowserSignerBase         -- Base class for browser wallet integration
    UnisatSigner            -- Unisat wallet extension adapter
    XverseSigner            -- Xverse wallet extension adapter
```

---

**Previous:** [Installation & Setup](./installation.md) | **Next:** [Quick Start Guide](./quick-start.md)
